---
layout: post
title:  "23 and 2000"
date:   2007-08-13 01:00:00
excerpt: "An easy puzzle"
categories: WIP
tags:  Puzzle Math Easy
image:
  feature: calculator.jpg
  topPosition: -100px
bgContrast: dark
bgGradientOpacity: darker
syntaxHighlighter: no
---
You are given 23 whole numbers, not necessarily distinct, in a row.

You cannot change the order of the numbers.

Prove that there exists an arrangement of the symbols '+', '×', '(' and ')' in-between the 23 numbers, such that the final result is a valid formula, whose evaluated value equals 0 mod 2000.

### Extra Credit 

1. Is 23 a tight bound? Can you find a sequence of 22 numbers such that all arrangements of the symbols '+', '×', '(' and ')' in-between them will result in numbers that are different from 0 mod 2000?
2. Consider a more general case. Replace in the riddle above the number 23 by K and the number 2000 by N. Describe all the pairs, K, N, for which a solution to the riddle exists.

*Thanks to Misha Seltzer, for sending me this cool riddle!*

## Spoiler Alert - Solution Ahead

$$2000 = 2^4 \times 5^3$$

Note that for any 2 numbers, a and b, if a or b is even, then $$(a \times b)$$ is even, and if both are odd, then $$(a + b)$$ is even. Basically, we can take any 2 consecutive numbers from the line and create an even number. That means that we can take the first 8 numbers, and create $$2^4$$.

We are left with 23 - 8 = 15 numbers. If we can take any sequence of 5 numbers and create a number the is divisible by 5, then we are done. Let's consider the numbers mod 5. If one of the numbers is 0 mod 5, just multiply all 5 numbers together. Otherwise, the 5 numbers are all equal to $$\plusminus 1, \plusminus 2$$ mod 5. If you have a number repeating 5 times, just add them all up. Otherwise, if you have a 1 and a -1 next to each other or a 2 and a -2 next to each other, just add those together and you get 0 mod 5 (and then multiply all of the numbers). Otherwise, 1 and -1 are not adjacent, and 2 and -2 are not adjacent.

1 1 1
1 1 2
//1 1 -2

1 2 1
1 2 2
1 2 -1

1 -2 1
1 -2 -1
1 -2 -2

That means that there must be a subsequence of the form: $$\plusminus 2 \plusminus 1 \plusminus2$$.
