---
layout: post
title:  "Pawns"
date:   2007-11-05 01:00:00
excerpt: "A puzzle with potential"
categories: Puzzles
tags:  Puzzle Math
image:
  feature: pawn.jpg
  topPosition: -300px
bgContrast: dark
bgGradientOpacity: darker
syntaxHighlighter: no
---
Consider an infinite checkerboard divided in two with an infinite line lying along the x-axis, as depicted below:

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/posts/pawns/far.png" %}

Let's zoom in a little:

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/posts/pawns/empty.png" %}

We will play a game on this board. In this game, you start with some pawns under the horizontal line. For example, here is a potential starting configuration:

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/posts/pawns/starting_example.png" %}

In each turn you can make a pawn jump over one of its 4-connected neighbors, thereby killing it (removing it from the board). The pawn's movement is demonstrated here:

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/posts/pawns/rules_before.png" %}

Will become this:

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/posts/pawns/rules_after.png" %}

When the game starts, all the pawns are below the line. You can move the pawns as per the rules above, and you get points depending on *how far above the line* you can go. For example, here is a starting configuration with 2 pawns and the first move:

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/posts/pawns/example1_1.png" %}

Resulting in a game ending with 1 point:

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/posts/pawns/example1_2.png" %}

It is obvious that in order to make a pawn cross the line (or move at all), at least two pawns are needed, so all games with a single pawn will end in a score of zero.

How many pawns are needed in order to score 2 points? As is demonstrated below, 4 pawns are sufficient, and indeed this is the minimum (check that you see why 2 and 3 pawns cannot do it).

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/posts/pawns/example2_1.png" %}

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/posts/pawns/example2_2.png" %}

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/posts/pawns/example2_3.png" %}

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/posts/pawns/example2_4.png" %}

Now for the riddle. How many pawns are needed in order to score 5 points?
