---
layout: post
title:  "Really Equal? Naturally!"
date:   2010-01-03 01:00:00
excerpt: "A algebraic puzzle"
categories: Puzzle
tags:  Math Puzzle Algebra
image:
  feature: numbers.jpg
  topPosition: -100px
bgContrast: dark
bgGradientOpacity: darker
syntaxHighlighter: no
---
You have a set *S* of 2N+1 real numbers, with the following property: if you remove any one element, you can partition the remaining 2N elements into two sets, *A* and *B*, each of size N, such that the sum of the N numbers in set *A* equals the sum of the N numbers in set *B*. Prove that all the numbers in the original set are equal.

### Spoiler Alert - Hint Ahead
Start by trying to solve the riddle for the special case where the set contains only *natural numbers* instead of general reals.

## Spoiler Alert - Solution Ahead!

We will solve the riddle for the case of natural numbers, integers, rational numbers, and finally real numbers. Note that everywhere below I use the regular set notation to denote multisets.

### Solving for the Natural Numbers

***Theorem 1***: If the numbers in *S* are all natural numbers, then they are all equal.

***Lemma 1***: If $$S \subset \mathbb{Z}$$, then all the numbers in *S* must have the same parity, i.e. either all numbers are even, or all numbers are odd.

***Proof of Lemma 1***: Indeed, let's consider two numbers $$x, y \in S$$. Since you can split the remaining numbers into 2 sets of equal sums that must mean that $$(\sum_{a \in S}a) - x$$ is even and $$(\sum_{a \in S}a) - y$$ is even. Therefore *x* and *y* have the same parity. $$\blacksquare$$

***Lemma 2***: *S* is a set satisfying the above property i.f.f. the set $$\{x - t \mid x \in S, t \in \mathbb{Z}\}$$ is satisfying the above property.

***Lemma 3***: If *S* contains only even numbers, then *S* satisfies the above property, i.f.f. the set $$\{\frac{x}{2} \mid x \in S \}$$ satisfies the above property.

The proofs of Lemmas 2 and 3 are trivial.

***Proof of Theorem 1***: By __*Lemma 1*__, all elements of *S* are either even or odd. If all elements are odd, by __*Lemma 2*__, we can subtract 1 from all elements of *S*, making all elements even. If all the elements are even, by __*Lemma 3*__, we can divide all elements of by 2. Consider the sequence of sets you get by repeated application of this process, diving by 2 if all elements are even, and removing 1 if all elements are odd, until one of the elements of the set, *x*, becomes 0. Call the set at that point *S'*. Let *y* be another element of *S'*. If *y* is not 0, y must be an even number from Lemma 1. Keep diving all elements by 2 (from __*Lemma 3*__) at some point the image of *y* will be an odd number, leading to a contradiction. Therefore for all $$y \in S', y = x$$. Therefore all elements of *S'* are equal. Therefore all elements of *S* are equal. $$\blacksquare$$

### Solving for the Integers

***Theorem 2***: If the numbers in *S* are all integers, then they are all equal.

***Proof of Theorem 2***: Let $$m = \text{min}(S)$$. The set $$S' = \{x - m \mid x \in S\} \subset \mathbb{N}$$
satisfies the conditions of __*Theorem 1*__. Therefore all elements of *S'* are equal. Therefore all elements of *S* are equal. $$\blacksquare$$

### Solving for the Rationals

***Theorem 3***: If the numbers in *S* are all rational numbers, then they are all equal.

***Proof of Theorem 3***: Let $$S = \{\frac{a_i}{b_i} \mid 0 \leq i \leq N\}$$. Let $$g = \prod_{0 \le i \le N}b_i$$. Let $$S' = \{x \times g \mid x \in S\}$$. Then $$S' \subset \mathbb{Z}$$ and *S'* satisfies the condition of __*Theorem 2*__. So all the elements of S' are equal. So all the elements of *S* are equal. $$\blacksquare$$

### Solving for the Reals

***Theorem 4***: If the numbers in *S* are general real numbers, then they are all equal.

***Proof of Theorem 4***: Look at field extension of $$\mathbb{Q}$$ in $$\mathbb{R}$$ generated by the elements of *S*. You can look at its elements as a finite dimensional vector field over $$\mathbb{Q}$$. The claim is true i.f.f. it is true separately in each dimension. Each of the dimensions separately satisfies the conditions for __*Theorem 3*__, therefore the values in each dimension are all equal, therefore the values in all dimensions are equal, therefore the numbers in *S* are all equal. $$\blacksquare$$
