---
layout: post
title:  "Ball Pit"
date:   2020-03-01 12:00:00
excerpt: "An hard data structure puzzle"
categories: Puzzles
tags:  Puzzles Algorithms Data-Structures
image:
  feature: ball-pit.jpg
  topPosition: -100
bgContrast: light
bgGradientOpacity: lighter
syntaxHighlighter: yes
---
We need to build a data structure that simulates a ball pit. It needs to support 3 operations:

`void Insert(int color)` - Add a ball of color $$color$$ to the pit.

`void Remove(int color)` - Remove a ball of color $$color$$ from the pit. If the pit doesn't contain a ball of the color $$color$$, the behavior is undefined.

`bool Constant()` - Returns true i.f.f. all the balls in the pit are of the same color.

***Can you implement this data structure with less than O(n) memory? (where n is the number of colors)?***

> Thanks Ofir Mebel for this really cool riddle!

## Spoiler Alert - Solution Ahead!

All elements in our ball pit data structure are the same i.f.f. the *variance* $$V(x)$$ is 0.
Now:

$$V(x) = 0\\
\implies E(x^2) - (E(x))^2 = 0\\
\implies \frac{\sum{x_i^2}}{n} - (\frac{\sum{x_i}}{n})^2 = 0\\
\implies n\sum{x_i^2} = (\sum{x_i})^2$$

So the ball pit contains elements of the same color i.f.f. $$n\sum{x_i^2} = (\sum{x_i})^2$$, and we can implement this data structure with just 3 integer counters: $$n$$, $$\sum{x_i}$$, $$\sum{x_{i}^{2}}$$, as follows:

```c++
void Insert(int color) {
  n++;
  sigma_xi += color;
  sigma_xi2 += color * color;
}

void Remove(int color) {
  n--;
  sigma_xi -= color;
  sigma_xi2 -= color * color;
}

bool Constant() {
  return n * sigma_xi2 == sigma_xi * sigma_xi;
}
```

You can also reason about why this data structure works directly, ignoring the underlying variance calculation. Indeed, obviously if all the balls in the pit are the same color, `Constant` will return true. To show that `Constant` cannot return true otherwise, note that the function $$\sum{x_{i}^2}$$ strictly gets its minimum (subject to a fixed sum of the $$x_i$$s) when all the $$x_i$$ are equal. $$\blacksquare$$
